docs: Provide Monitoring docs (#2203)
kyma-project/lifecycle-manager: docs/operator/operations.md

# Lifecycle Manager - Operations

## Metrics

> Lifecycle Manager metrics are exposed over port `8080` through the metrics endpoint `/metrics`.

Reviewer: As far as I know these metrics are not gigantic blobs, but partitioned using labels by SKR and module. Please explain the labels being used, their names, and their valuesets (like what SKR identifier you are using in the label, is it a shootid, runtimeid, subaccountid, tenantid, etc, we have like a dozen of these).

If there are metrics which are not partitioned by both SKRs _and_ modules, then add a column saying which metric has what labels for partitioning the data.

The following metrics are exposed:

| Metric Name                              | Metric Type    | Description                                                                                  |
|------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `lifecycle_mgr_requeue_reason_total`     | Counter Vector | Indicates the requeue reason of a reconciler.                                                |

Reviewer: Please elaborate on the terminology here. "of a reconciler" is an exact description for you, who are working on this stack, however for other people (who do know know the kyma/klm architecture deeply by heart) this is a statement, which is understood as words, but not as an architecture of a stack. I guess this means here, that a module reconciler on an SKR.

> | `lifecycle_mgr_kyma_state`               | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the state of a Kyma CR.                                                            |

Reviewer: Where can we find the possible values for the states, and their actual meaning for an operator?

> | `lifecycle_mgr_module_state`             | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the state of a module added to a Kyma CR.                                        |

Reviewer: Where can we find the possible values and their actual meaning?

| `lifecycle_mgr_mandatory_modules`        | Gauge          | Indicates the number of mandatory ModuleTemplates.                                           |
| `lifecycle_mgr_mandatory_module_state`   | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the state of a mandatory module enabled on a Kyma CR.                              |

> | `reconcile_duration_seconds`             | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the duration of a manifest reconciliation in seconds.                              |

Author: yes it is the manifest CR

> | `reconcile_duration_seconds`             | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the duration of a manifest reconciliation in seconds.                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `reconcile_duration_seconds`             | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the duration of a Manifest CR reconciliation in seconds.                              |
```

> | `lifecycle_mgr_purgectrl_time`           | Gauge          | Indicates the average duration of purge reconciliation.                                      |

Reviewer: Where can we find the definition for "purge reconciliation"? I do have an idea, however the target audience is people who do not know about kyma deeply, and the goal is to give them knowledge.

| `lifecycle_mgr_purgectrl_requests_total` | Counter        | Indicates the total number of purges.                                                        |
| `lifecycle_mgr_purgectrl_error`          | Gauge Vector   | Indicates the errors produced by the purge.                                                      |

> | `lifecycle_mgr_self_signed_cert_not_renew` | Gauge Vector  | Indicates that the self-signed Certificate of a Kyma CR is not renewed yet.                 |

Reviewer: Where can we read more about this mechanics? Just by this description this is not clear for an outsider, whether this is an error (not renewed yet, but should have been already), or just a FYI-style indicator.

| Self-signed Certificate Not Renew         | Indicates the self-signed Certificate of related Kyma is not renewed yet.                                                                            |
| Purge Duration Seconds                    | Shows the duration of the purge reconciliation.                                                                                                      |
| Purge Count                               | Shows the total number of purges.                                                                                                                    |
| Purge Errors                              | Shows the errors produced by the purge.                                                                                                              |

### 2. Lifecycle Manager Kyma Status
This dashboard gives an overview of the Kyma CRs and modules states. It includes the following:

| Panel Name                    | Description                                                                                     |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Enabled Modules               | Shows the statistics of the enabled modules on the SKR Clusters, including the total number of each module. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Enabled Modules               | Shows the number of all modules enabled in the SKR Clusters, including the total number for every module. |
```

> | Kyma Manifest in Error State  | Shows the manifests in Error state with information about the Kyma name, module name, and shoot name. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Kyma Manifest in Error State  | Shows the Manifest CRs in the `Error` state with the information about the relevant Kyma CR name, module name, and shoot name. |
```

> | Kyma State Total              | Graph showing the number of Kyma CRs in each state over time.                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Kyma State Total              | A graph showing the number of Kyma CRs in each state over time.                                  |
```

> | Module State Total            | Graph showing the number of modules enabled on Kyma CRs in each state over time.               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Module State Total            | A graph showing the number of modules added to Kyma CRs in each state over time.               |
```

> | Mandatory Module State Total  | Graph showing the number of mandatory modules enabled on Kyma CRs in each state over time.     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Mandatory Module State Total  | A graph showing the number of mandatory modules added to Kyma CRs in each state over time.     |
```

> | Mandatory Modules Count       | Indicates the number of mandatory modules installed on the SKR clusters.                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Mandatory Modules Count       | Indicates the number of mandatory modules installed in the SKR clusters.                       |
```

> ### 3. Lifecycle Manager Watcher Components

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### 3. Runtime Watcher Components
```

> This dashboard gives an overview of the Watcher Components. It includes the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This dashboard gives an overview of the Runtime Watcher components. It includes the following:
```
Do you mean [Runtime Watcher](https://github.com/kyma-project/runtime-watcher)?

> This dashboard gives an overview of the Runtime Watcher components. It includes the following:

Reviewer: As I do not see any other docs, from where does the reader ought to know what the "watcher" is, what is its function? So far, for the reader there's a name, without a meaning and a function.

| Panel Name                      | Description                                                                                                   |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Usage                           | Shows the statistics of Watcher deployments installed on the SKR Cluster, including the total number of SKRs, the percentage of SKRs with Watcher deployment, and the total number of Watcher deployments. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Usage                           | Shows the statistics of Runtime Watcher deployments installed in the SKR cluster, including the total number of SKRs, the percentage of SKRs with a Runtime Watcher deployment, and the total number of Runtime Watcher deployments. |
```

> | Images on Shoots                | A table mapping the Watcher images installed on SKR Clusters with their numbers.                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Images on Shoots                | A table mapping Runtime Watcher images installed in SKR clusters with their numbers.                              |
```

> | Unready SKR Watcher Deployments | Shows the total number of unready Watcher deployments on the SKR Clusters.                                    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Unready SKR Watcher Deployments | Shows the total number of unready Runtime Watcher deployments in the SKR clusters.                                    |
```

| Pending Requests                | Shows the total number of pending requests to the Listener.                                                   |
| Failed Requests per Minute      | A time series showing the rate of failed requests per minute to the Listener, including the URI for failed requests. |
| AdmissionRequest Duration       | A graph showing the duration of AdmissionRequests, including the error reasons for failed requests.           |
| AdmissionRequest Error Total    | Shows the total number of errors in AdmissionRequests.                                                        |
| AdmissionRequests Total         | Shows the total number of AdmissionRequests.                                                                  |
| Failed KCP Requests Total       | Shows the total number of failed KCP requests.                                                                |
| KCP Requests Total              | Shows the total number of KCP requests.                                                                       |
| Requests Ratio                  | Shows the ratio of AdmissionRequests to the total KCP requests.                                               |

> ### 4. Lifecycle Manager Mandatory Modules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### 4. Mandatory Modules
```

> This dashboard gives an overview of all the mandatory modules installed on the SKR Clusters. It includes the following metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This dashboard gives an overview of all the mandatory modules installed in the SKR clusters. It includes the following metrics:
```

| Panel Name                   | Description                                                                                                   |
|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Warden Usage                 | Shows the statistics of Warden module installation on the SKR Clusters, including the total number of SKRs, the percentage of SKRs with Warden deployment, and the total number of Warden deployments. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Warden Usage                 | Shows the statistics of the Warden module installation in the SKR clusters, including the total number of SKRs, the percentage of SKRs with a Warden deployment, and the total number of Warden deployments. |
```

> | Warden Images on Shoots      | A table mapping the Warden images installed on SKR Clusters with their numbers.                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Warden Images on Shoots      | A table mapping the Warden images installed in SKR clusters with their numbers.                              |
```

> | Unready Warden Deployments   | Shows the total number of unready Warden deployments on the SKR Clusters.                                    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Unready Warden Deployments   | Shows the total number of unready Warden deployments in the SKR clusters.                                    |
```

> Some prometheus rules are in place to alert if some metrics are not in the expected state:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following Prometheus rules are in place to alert if some metrics are not in the expected state:
```

> 1. The lifecycle_mgr_self_signed_cert_not_renew metric has the value of 1 for 30 minutes, indicating that the Kyma self-signed certificate renewal buffer time has been exceeded by 30 minutes.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if I follow, so `1 for 30 minutes` is the exact value?

Author: I mean it has been with the value of 1 for a duration of 30 minutes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `lifecycle_mgr_self_signed_cert_not_renew` metric has the value of `1` for 30 minutes, indicating that the Kyma self-signed certificate renewal buffer time has been exceeded by 30 minutes.
```

|------------------------------------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `lifecycle_mgr_requeue_reason_total`     | Counter Vector | requeue_reason<br/>requeue_type                               | Indicates the requeue reason of the Lifecycle Manager [reconcilers](../contributor/02-controllers.md#controllers).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `lifecycle_mgr_requeue_reason_total`     | Counter Vector | `requeue_reason`<br/>`requeue_type`                               | Indicates the requeue reason of the Lifecycle Manager [reconcilers](../contributor/02-controllers.md#controllers).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

| `lifecycle_mgr_self_signed_cert_not_renew` | Gauge Vector  | kyma_name                                                     | Indicates that the self-signed Certificate of a Kyma CR is not renewed yet. This metric is just to verify that that the renewal of the certificate is working as expected since we rely on the cert-manager mechanism for the certificate rotation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> Metrics are partitioned by labels:

Reviewer 2: I would change the verb "partitioned" to a different one... grouped?
```suggestion
The metrics are grouped by the following labels:
```

> - `requeue_reason`: This indicates the reason for the requeue of the Lifecycle Manager [reconcilers](../contributor/02-controllers.md#controllers). The reasons include if there is a specific error, or the reason for the synchronization between the KCP and SKR clusters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `requeue_reason`: Indicates the reason for the requeue of the Lifecycle Manager [reconcilers](../contributor/02-controllers.md#controllers). The reasons include if there is a specific error, or the reason for the synchronization between the KCP and SKR clusters.
```

> - `requeue_type`: This indicates whether the requeue is expected or not. The possible values here are `intended` and `unexpected`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `requeue_type`: Indicates whether the requeue is expected or not. The possible values are `intended` and `unexpected`.
```

- `kyma_name`: The Kyma CR name.

> - `state`: The state of the module, manifest or Kyma CRs. The possible values are `Error`, `Ready`, `Processing`, `Warning`, and `Deleting`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `state`: The state of the module, Manifest or Kyma CRs. The possible values are `Error`, `Ready`, `Processing`, `Warning`, and `Deleting`.
```

- `shoot`: The name of the SKR cluster.
- `instance_id`: The instance id.
- `module_name`: The module name.
- `err_reason`: The error reason for the purge reconciler. The possible values are `PurgeFinalizerRemovalError` and `CleanupError`.

> - `manifest_name`: The name of manifest CR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `manifest_name`: The name of the Manifest CR.
```

| Requests Ratio                  | Shows the ratio of AdmissionRequests to the total KCP requests.                                               |

#### 4. Mandatory Modules

This dashboard gives an overview of all the mandatory modules installed in the SKR clusters. It includes the following metrics:

| Panel Name                   | Description                                                                                                   |
|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Warden Usage                 | Shows the statistics of the Warden module installation in the SKR clusters, including the total number of SKRs, the percentage of SKRs with a Warden deployment, and the total number of Warden deployments. |
| Warden Images on Shoots      | A table mapping the Warden images installed in SKR clusters with their numbers.                              |
| Unready Warden Deployments   | Shows the total number of unready Warden deployments in the SKR clusters.                                    |

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Prometheus Rules

```
As the Prometheus rules don't belong to the Mandatory modules section I think we could separate them with a header.
